[MUSIC]
In this video we continue our DAX journey,
having a look at some of the DAX
time intelligence functions.
As we saw in the previous video,
the real power and
Power Pivot comes in when we
start using DAX measures.
Coming back to have a look
at our DAX library again,
if you scroll down in the list,
you will see a category called time
intelligence functions and
now some amazing options in here.
Time intelligence functions allow
us to measure patterns in our
business metrics over time.
So for example, I might want to know,
my total at the end of the quarter,
or I might need to know my total month
to date, or the one we're going to
be looking at, which is what was
the same value, same period last year.
Before we can start using these time
intelligence functions, however,
there's another function we need to know
about, called the calculate function.
And that's where we're going to start.
I'm back in my sales by year, and we
have a completely different requirement,
but we're going to reuse
the same pivot table.
This time what we'd like to be able to do,
is to compare our total sales
compared to just our bike sales.
And we want to do this by month.
So on I'm going to get rid of my category.
I'm just going to remove that, and
I'm going to get rid of
date hierarchy as well.
And then coming to my calendar,
I'm going to expand more items, and
I'm going to grab month and
drag it into rows.
But you'll notice something quite
interesting in regular pivot tables
it uses custom lists to sort that
has not happened in my pivot table.
Now if you have the same problem,
don't worry about it.
You're going to come to row labels,
click the drop down.
Come to more sort options, and
we're going to sort ascending by month and
then just click OK, problem solved.
Now I'm just going to tidy
up my chart a little bit, so
just make it a little bit wider.
We're going to put the legend at
the bottom of the chart and I'm going to
switch off my field buttons just to
make it a little easier to work with.
All right, now we don't want
our sum of all the quantity.
We actually want to start working
without order items because we
need to filter by category, and
there's no link between category and
order, only between category and
order items.
So let's start by adding a measure to make
it a little easier to work with our line
total.
We're going to come to
our order items table,
right click ,add measure,
we going to call this measure, Item Total.
And in our formula box, we're just
going to add up our total items.
So equals sum,
open up our brackets if you just type lin.
There's our order item line total and
I'm going to close my brackets,
set it to currency and click OK.
What we're going to do now,
is remove our sum of all the quantity and
instead, we're going to
add our item total.
So that is my total sales,
but now next to that,
I want to see my total sales for bikes.
In other words, I want to be able to
filter the data using a measure and
the calculation going to
need is our calculate.
Calculate is probably most similar
to a countifs or a sumifs.
It allows us to do an aggregation and
specify the filter.
What's brilliant about the calculate
is it overwrites the fields of context,
in your pivot table,
let's have a look at how it works.
So coming back to order items,
I'm going to right click, and measure and
I'm going to call this measure,
Bike Sales.
I'm going to click into my formula box,
and I'm going to type cal and
select my calculate function.
The first thing the calculate wants
is an expression which tells it
what it's trying to aggregate and
in this case it's my Item Total.
So if you just type it and select,
Item Total, nice and easy.
Now I'm going to type a comma, the next
and the calculate needs is your filters.
And you can add multiple filters,
but we're just going to add one,
we want to filter by our lookup category.
So I'm just going to type cat,
select a lookup products Category and
I need that to be equal to
open new double quotes, Bikes.
I'm going to close my bracket now,
select Currency again and
click OK, and
if I come into my order items and
tick Bike Sales I can now see my
Bike Sales next to my Item Total.
If I remove Item Total and come up and
choose some category for
my look up product, and
grab product sub category and
pop it into columns,
You'll notice it's only giving me the sub
categories for the category bikes.
So you can actually see that that
calculate is forcing the filter context
within this pivot.
All right,
let's take this one step further.
What I'd like to be able to see now
I'm going to get rid of subcategory
I'd like to be able to
compare my bike sales for
a given year to the bike
sales the previous year.
So I'm going to need to add a slicer.
So clicking into my pivot table,
I'm going to come up to pivot table,
analyze Insert slicer, and
I need a slicer for year.
I am going to use the one for
my date hierarchy.
So select that and click OK.
And now I'm going to move my slicer
down beneath my pivot table and
I'm just going to make it quite wide and
quite short, and
then change the columns to full.
So I can actually see my
dates a little more easily.
And if I select 2019,
I'm seeing my total bike sales for 2019.
But now I need another measure,
which will show me the bike
sales from the previous year.
And this is where we're going to use
our time intelligence functions, and
the one we're going to use
is same period last year.
So clicking into your pivot, we're
going to come and add one last measure.
Right click order items, add measure.
This is going to be Bike Sales,
previous year and I'm splitting yr,
and then I'm going to
/click into my formula box.
Now once again, we're going to have
to use the calculate function,
because I need to override this filter.
So we're going to type cal and calculate.
What we're trying to add up this
time is our bike sales, so bik,
and tab to select Bike Sales.
Then we're going to press a comma and
now we add our filter.
We're going to filter to show just
the values for the same period last year.
So SAM, and
tab to select same period last year and
the argument that this
function needs is a date, but
it's quite important that
the dates are sequential.
So we're going to use
our calendar date and
this is where our calendars
come in really handy.
Now close your bracket for your same
period last year, close your bracket for
your calculate.
Set it to currency and click OK.
A new measure has been added and
when I select it,
I can now see my bike sales for this
year and the previous year side by side.
If I select 2020, I can now see 2020 and
2019, side by side.
And now we're starting to see the real
power of Power Pivot and Dax.
So this week, we have seen how we can
add millions of rows to our data model,
how we can create data analysis that draws
data from multiple related datasets,
how we can access the data model using
pivot tables and cube functions.
And most importantly,
how we can use DAX to start building
powerful data analysis expressions.
What you may not realize is that all
of the features we've been learning
about this course so far,
are also available in another
powerful business intelligence
tool called Power BI.
And that's what we're
going to look at next week.